A thermal power station works on the principle that heat is released by burning fuel which produces working fluid i.e. (steam) from water. The steam so produced runs the turbine coupled to generator which produces electrical energy.

A working fluid goes through a repetitive cycle change and this cyclic change involving heat and work is known as thermodynamic cycle. Thus, a thermodynamic cycle is a series of operations, involving a heat source, a heat receiver, a machine and working substance.

Classification of thermodynamics power cycles can be done into two types:
vapor power cycle and gas power cycle
	Vapor cycle working fluid exists in liquid phase during one part of the cycle (i.e from condenser outlet to Boiler) and mixed phase within the steam boiler and in vapor phase at the Boiler outlet.
	Gas power cycle working fluid during the cycle remains in gas phase.

Steam power generation units run on vapor power cycle ....generally using water as the working fluid.

next slide please

Rankine cycle is the theoretical vapor-liquid cycle on which steam power plant works. In a vapor cycle if the working fluid passes through various components of the power plant without irreversibility and frictional pressure drop, then the cycle is called as Ideal Rankine Cycle. 

Figure 1 here shows the simplified flow diagram of a rankine cycle

It is most convenient to draw it on both the P-V and T-s diagrams with respect to the saturated-liquid and vapor lines of the working fluid, which usually but not always, is water. As we can see in fig 2.

1. Operation (k-l): Condensed steam is at pressure p2 and temperature T2 which is pumped into the boiler by means of feed pump at pressure p1 and there it is at temperature T1.
2. Operation (l-m): The hot water at a saturation temperature T1 is evaporated to steam at pressure p1.
3. Operation (m-n): After coming out of the boiler, the steam enters the turbine and expands adiabatically to a pressure p2.
4. Operation (n-k): The steam expands and condenses to water in the condenser at the same temperature and pressure. Thus, the cycle is completed. This condensed water is again pumped to the boiler and then the next cycle starts

next slide please

its efficiency can be increased by:
	1. Lowering the operating pressure
				of the condenser which lowers the temperature at which heat is rejected. The overall effect of lowering the condenser pressure is an increase in the thermal efficiency of the cycle.

	2. Superheating the steam to high temperatures:-
The average temperature at which heat is added to the steam can be increased without increasing the boiler pressure ,by superheating the steam to high temperatures.
Superheating the steam to higher temperatures has another very desirable effect: It decreases the moisture content of the steam at the turbine exit.

	 3. Increasing the Boiler pressure:-
Increasing the operating pressure of the boiler, automatically raises the temperature at which boiling takes place.
This raises the average temperature at which heat is added to the steam and thus raises the thermal efficiency of the cycle..


In a real power-plant cycle the compression by the pump and the expansion in the turbine are not isentropic. In other words, these processes are non-reversible, and entropy is increased during the two processes. This somewhat increases the power required by the pump and decreases the power generated by the turbine.
Hence Rankine Cycle is modified into two types of cycles:
Reheat Cycle
	The purpose of a reheating cycle is to remove the moisture carried by the steam at the final stages of the expansion process.
Regenerative Cycle
	After emerging from the condenser (possibly as a subcooled liquid) the working fluid is heated by steam tapped from the hot portion of the cycle.


Thats all from my side thank you for being a patient listener. over to you siddharth.



